hi everyone los LaVon comer here with
the series finale man-child Paul and the
Locke Viet seemed like ages ago
CHP - OH - this time part 6 in this
series where we will not the Royal we
attempted to get a nice glance of this
2,000 year old relationship China and
Vietnam have had their ups and downs
throughout the centuries we looked at
the good and the bad in offering this
general survey of the relationship plus
what we'll look at today perhaps some of
you moving forward can all have a better
appreciation of that relationship in
this episode everything will start to
become more familiar well modern times
it's what's most relevant to us and what
we can most relate to last episode we
ended with the Chinese
down-on-their-luck after another
embarrassing defeat this time at the
hands of the French Navy in the sanno
French war August 1884 to April 1885
between the damage done to the Chinese
navy and food Chow by the French and
then later on after the sino-japanese
war 1894 1895 China had hardly any Navy
at all
not like today well I said I wasn't
gonna wander off into the whole other
world of French Indochina history most
of it didn't involve China after the
sino-french war France got a free hand
down in Vietnam and China's periodic
domination and influence down there
already greatly diminished came to an
end it was a heck of a run the days when
the Han southern Han Leo song song UN
mingjing when China could just march in
and take over the whole Red River Valley
and get away with that it was a thing of
the past the Vietnamese had to be asking
themselves how did all this happen how
did they end up in the same boat as the
Chinese how was it in such a short
period of time
Vietnam found itself in such a helpless
State in the face of French military
force just as some intellectuals and
students in China pointed to
Confucianism as a contributory cause for
China's war
it was the same in Vietnam a lot of what
they were saying in China was being
echoed in Vietnam their Confucian system
may have been fine and well before but
now it had become irrelevant and in fact
had made it easy for the Vietnamese to
become overpowered by the foreigners and
it offered no solutions on how to get
rid of them
the Vietnamese they saw the same things
going on in Japan that China did just as
there was this thirst in China to find a
solution to the country's predicament
same was felt in vietnam vietnamese
students and intellectuals also went to
Japan to study their development model
and they observed and they learned to
many Patriots in China and Vietnam there
was this curiosity this need to know how
the Japanese these Asian people like
them how did they modernize how were
they able to so quickly get up to snuff
and stand up to the foreign powers and
in the russo-japanese war 1904-1905 even
defeat them so off to japan many of
these vietnamese went to check out the
scene and study the merits of this
japanese social political and economic
model one of the students who went to
japan to see for himself was wince in
Kong when I was growing up in Chicago
during the 60s when the Cubs infield
third to first was Sano Kessinger
Beckert and banks we knew him as Ho Chi
Minh the facts stories and nationalist
legends attributed to this revolutionary
hero are well-worn starting from his
time beginning in 1911 when he worked as
a cook on a ship traveling between
France New York and Boston he worked as
a dishwasher and a cook for a while in
London during World War one and got out
and saw the world Ho Chi Minh's life was
similar to Joanne ly but each was unique
in its own way just like Jo ho moved to
Paris in 1917 and it was there in France
where he first heard about the Bolshevik
Revolution there he received his first
exposure to communism
familiar story same thing happened to
Joe and Lai dung shell paying Chagny
yeah wrong John and and others who was
in Paris from 1917 to 1923 and went by
the name when I cook I cook in Chinese
is pronounced I qual means patriot the
French Communist Party was formed in
1920 ho Chi Minh became a founding
member as the representative from
Indochina he got his first taste as a
member of the French Socialist Party
United in this cause he struck up a
friendship in Paris with Jo and ly that
lasted a lifetime incidentally it was
starting to happen about here 1920s that
Vietnamese mu or war you began to
gather steam just as the vernacular was
taken China by storm China had their
Lucian's losses by jeans Jung Islands
who emerged in China during the 20s and
30s again no less different in Vietnam
they too had their literary greats who
knew exactly how to craft the vernacular
language in such a way that they could
articulate the moment and offer
solutions on the best path for the
country to take Vietnamese language
journals pamphlets and books were
printed and passed out like never before
you see 1919 the Confucian style civil
service exams were ended in Vietnam
after nine centuries and use no qin
remember him then lo dynasty founder he
had brought them back when he set up his
dynasty in 939 now they were abolished
who probably worked well for staffing
the government in its day but this was
now eighty-sixing the civil service
exams based on the Confucian classics
that was akin to the Catholic Church
abandoning Latin there'd no longer be
any need for anyone to learn it it is
the same with classical Chinese in
Vietnam
all you needed to know now is Vietnamese
mu like their Chinese neighbors to
the north vietnam saw the same rapid
industrialization during the 1920s and
30s with
railroads factories and all kinds of
infrastructure projects the French had
quite an enterprise going on in
Indochina this period right here is
around the time my in-laws were born
1924 Ho Chi Minh went to Moscow to
continue his communist education the
Comintern later sent him to China where
he stayed for the next 20 years he
openly trained and hung out with the CCP
until the shanghai massacre in April
1927 after that like most all communists
he went underground in China whole
carried out his organizing activities on
behalf of the Vietnamese communists
there was a half-century to go yet
before Ho Chi Minh would enjoy his final
victory though he didn't live to see it
in February 1941 after making a lot of
contacts and receiving a fine education
Howe left China and returned to Vietnam
this was his first time back since 1911
he began organizing at once surprisingly
the Vietnam communists earliest backers
were the KMT not the CCP Chiang kai-shek
was hoping to win the Communists over to
his side Jiang was particularly
sensitive to the treatment of Chinese
who had long migrated to Vietnam and now
called the place home
he didn't want them treated as
second-class citizens in their own
adoptive country by the French
authorities China's concerns for the
Chinese of Vietnam will also become a
hot-button issue again as the 1970s
gather steam the Viet Minh or League for
the independence of Vietnam was formed
in May 1941 by Ho Chi Minh it was around
this time with the world at war for the
second time that the Viet Minh began
their rise and started mobilizing
peasants and put the whole enterprise in
motion that would one day lead to the
victory of the Communists in Vietnam
I'm gonna bandy his name about their
similar way that historians use melts at
dong to anthropomorphize the collective
efforts of the CCP just as Mao and his
comrades and I arms co-founded the
People's Republic of China together with
him it was the same in Vietnam don't let
me fool you with any prop again
that suggests Ho Chi Minh did this all
by himself if I had to mention four
others whose names were paramount in
this history and worth remembering those
would be fam bonding Vaughn windgap and
starting the 1950s layin and lay took
tall laid up tall some of you from my
generation might remember him he was the
one that was Co awarded the 1973 Nobel
Peace Prize with dr. Henry Kissinger for
ending the Vietnam War but if you recall
just like Marlon Brando did that very
same year the 1973 Oscars lay doc talk
decline the award in trying to focus on
where the Nexus was between all the
history happening in the first half of
the 20th century in China Vietnam
relations the history books start to
thin out a lot here each country have
their own party and political issues to
sort out and although there were
similarities between the experiences of
China and Vietnam they both had their
hands full and despite their shared
history both nations were forced to deal
with more pressing issues closer to home
than their bilateral relations one
interesting story involved an incident
during World War Two in November 1944
Viet Minh fighters rescued a u.s. airman
whose plane went down just south of the
China Vietnam border Ho Chi Minh
personally led the escort that brought
the airmen safely back to his base in
China there he met with the legendary
Claire Chennault great American hero who
we featured in the two flying tiger
episodes CHP 151 152 for his efforts
Howe returned to Vietnam in May 1945
along with a team of US military an OSS
spooks so called advisors in this
relationship as we know isn't gonna last
same with the Dixie mission in China
that communism thing that was a deal
breaker in both cases in March 1945
Japan will make a last-ditch effort to
hold on to what they had in Vietnam and
preempt any efforts by the French to get
rid of that
remember the Japanese military had kept
the French in place in Indochina to
manage things for them and they launched
a surprise offensive against French
Indochina officials who were all
overthrown in its place Japan set up a
kind of Manchu Kuo government in Vietnam
with the last when Emperor Bao died
playing the pool year all the Vietnamese
weren't so keen on having the French
around and so tolerated and cooperated
with the Japanese occupiers in an enemy
of my enemy is my friend kind of a way
we all know however that it all comes
crashing down in the end and the end was
pretty near at this point by June of
1945 the Viet Minh forces had gotten rid
of the Japanese occupiers in the north
of Vietnam two months later it was over
and on August 30th Emperor Bao Dai
abdicated then two days later on
September 2nd ho chi minh declared
independence in front of half a million
people in Ba Dinh square and he
announced the creation of the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam
this was Viet Nam's moment similar to
Mao's Declaration of the founding of the
PRC on Tiananmen 10/1 1949 Ho Chi Minh
got to have his moment first but he only
had half the country as soon as the dust
settled all political prisoners in the
North were rescued and released these
included many of the future first
generation leaders of Vietnam they all
had one shared mission at this point get
rid of the French colonialists set up a
new unified country let's go over what
happened next after World War two ended
we've looked at how this all affected
China again it was a familiar story with
what happened in Vietnam up in China the
Chinese nation man's 200 years of saying
yes sir yes sir to the foreign
imperialist powers then eight savage
years of Japanese aggression and finally
four more years of bloody civil war and
then in 1949 China was liberated and
Vietnam it took until 1954 let's quickly
look at the road or at least these
stepping stones to the
bein foo it's quite a history Vietnam
right after the Japanese surrender again
let's try and stick to the China part of
it all well you know the story World War
two ended Japan retreated back to their
country and began the rebuilding process
in almost 5 trillion dollar GDP today
who'd had a long way to go back in 1945
the French thought they might slip their
feet right back into those nice furry
Louie Vuitton slippers and pick up where
they left off before the Japanese came
and ruined everything imperialism
colonialism had started to take on an
even worse odor after World War two than
it had before so World War Two was over
and what to do about Vietnam without
getting into the gory details at this
time right at the end of World War two
the Viet Minh forces were still rather
small and couldn't yet stand up to the
Allies when the decision was made to cut
the country in half of the sixteenth
parallel as far as China Vietnam
relations went the KMT was still the
legitimate government of China they came
in about a hundred thousand strong
mainly in the north of Vietnam and
attempted to fill the vacuum left by the
vacating Japanese their mission get
Vietnam on their side and not on the
side of Mao Britain at first did the
same in the south they were acting as
placeholders for the French Britain was
still hoping to cling to their Asian
colonies and well it wouldn't help their
cause of Vietnam booted the French out
what would they say in Malaya Singapore
and Hong Kong the Communist Viet Minh
they controlled the north of Vietnam
Viet Minh sympathizers down in the South
were you know slowly driven out by a
potent force of remnant Japanese forces
fighting with the French and British
everybody started running to their side
of the fence French troops began to pour
in and they began to play for keeps the
last nine years of the French occupation
would be brutal this was a very
complicated and messy shakeout period in
Vietnam following the end of World War
two there were a lot of different
factions
on all sides even within the Vietnam
communist party ho chi minh had been
trying to find some way after the war to
befriend the US the ccp had done the
same thing since before with the dixie
mission ho pulled out all the stops and
negotiations went all the way up to the
11th hour but like his good friend and
communist brother in arms Chou Enlai Ho
Chi Minh at the walk away empty-handed
from Uncle Sam in the end and they were
more than a couple moments in history
where as an American you could perhaps
say Paris seed was planted for the
Vietnam War in March of 1946 Chinese
forces vacated the north of Vietnam and
the Viet Minh had to make all kinds of
concessions now their army was getting
stronger but it wasn't in the same
league as their opponents yet so Ho Chi
Minh at the look the other way when part
of the deal of China's withdrawal
involved allowing 15,000 French soldiers
to come in and restore order and
essentially occupy the north yeah
there's this famous story about this
moment in history like a lot of
nationalist history it never actually
happened but it really caught fire and
it became part of the legend of Ho Chi
Minh it really hits home about how China
and Vietnam shared history was viewed by
some when criticized for allowing the
French back in rather than to allow the
Chinese to remain ho as the story goes
replied quote you fools don't you
realize what it means if the Chinese
remain don't you remember your history
the last time the Chinese came they
stayed a thousand years the French are
foreigners they are weak colonialism is
dying the white man is finished in Asia
but if the Chinese stay now they'll
never go as for me I prefer to sniff
French for five years then eat
Chinese for the rest of my life and
quote back home ladies and gentlemen's
it wasn't the right time in the USA to
be talking about making peace with
communists so with China with Vietnam
the chance came the chance went and here
we are by the end of that year 1946
along came the first Indochina war or
the anti French Resistance war as it's
called in Vietnam misses to
differentiate it from the second
Indochina war known in Vietnam as the
resistance war against America and where
I come from we call it the Vietnam War
Democratic Republic of Vietnam forces in
the meantime under Vaughn windgap had
really been strengthening they too were
playing for keeps and while all this is
happening 1945 to 1949 and then into the
Korean War
China was engulfed in their own turmoil
once the Communists emerged victorious
in China in October 1949 China Vietnam
relations entered a whole new era let's
quickly run through what happened in
Vietnam in December 1946 the French
invaded Hanoi Hanoi Ho Chi Minh and
Phong windgap used the same playbook as
mild sadang and Judah so the French were
often forced to fight a guerrilla war
most of the fighting was in the North
Phong windgap led the People's Army of
Vietnam Ho Chi Minh led the Viet Minh
against a coalition of forces lined up
with the French Valen windgap went to
China in January 1950 to discuss
military support in their fight to get
rid of the French China started shipping
weapons training Vietnamese troops
building roads and well doing whatever
they could this would all come to a
dramatic climax at the Battle of Dien
Bien Phu May 7th 1954 where France with
the help of Chinese advisers and Soviet
equipment aiding the Vietnamese met
their Waterloo and indochine right on
the heels of the fall of Dan Ben Phu
came the April 26th to July 20th 1954
Geneva Conference not terribly
constructive us in China not talking to
each other as we recall from so many
past episodes once the u.s. lost China
quotation marks around the word lost the
matter of stopping the spread of
communism in Asia became almost the
single-minded purpose of u.s. foreign
policy with the French departure from
Indochina who was going to ensure that
these communists didn't go around
spreading their poisonous ideology to
Cambodia Laos Thailand Malaysia
Indonesia Burma and who knows even India
and maybe even our new BFF in Asia Japan
President Eisenhower didn't coin the
term but he was the one who warned of
these Asian dominoes falling one after
another so that Geneva Conference that
was supposed to deal with these pressing
issues the USA was already four years
into the Red Scare and McCarthyism so it
was doubtful the Geneva Conference was
going to produce a satisfying result
well we know what happened Geneva
Conference the scene of the alleged
historic incidents when John Foster
Dulles refused to shake Joanne lyes hand
Vietnam got cut in half communist north
of the 17th parallel and a Western
backed regime of strange bedfellows to
the south the Vietnamese people were
left with a choice of two nice
dictatorships the DRV in the north
Democratic Republic of Vietnam and in
the South was the SVN or state of
Vietnam mind you this was only supposed
to be a temporary fix
elections were set for 1956 if that's
not a recipe for war I'll eat my head by
the time America dove headfirst into
Vietnam in the 1960s Ho Chi Minh was
already in bad shape he was suffering
from a number of ailments and maladies
including diabetes by the time American
troops were pouring into Vietnam he was
already in the back seat Howe remained a
figurehead to Viet Nam's revolutionary
struggle and a bogeyman for Americans
like me who heard his name every night
on the evening news
the real power was later on ho Chi Minh
died on September 2nd 1969 24 years to
the day that he
at his moment declaring the nation's
founding at Baden square well Vietnam
War 58,000 220 American troops perished
over 300 thousand wounded no need to
rehash all that here or the three
million Vietnamese civilians who died in
the crossfire of the Agent Orange that's
a different podcast end of April 1975
Saigon fell my wife's family bolted from
Vietnam 1976 the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam was declared still around today
a vacation paradise I have it on good
authority 1955 to 1975 not too much
happening in China Vietnam relations
China had their own problems and
sino-vietnam in that followed the power
struggles in the Chinese Communist Party
the Cultural Revolution and don't forget
Viet Nam's public enemy number one
Richard M Nixon he visited China
jump-started US PRC relations Vietnam
history tends to play down the
importance of the role played by China
and the Vietnam War but they were on
vietnam side not in the korean war sense
US forces didn't face them on the
battlefield China was on vietnam side
and that's one of the main reasons that
brought Nixon to Beijing in 1972 the
photo at Capital Airport with Joanne Lai
shaken Nixon's hand didn't go down too
well in Vietnam in fact it was viewed as
a downright hostile betrayal the China
Vietnam relationship took a huge hit
from that the Vietnam the Vietnam
leadership didn't use these words but
essentially they asked China how could
you
well Vietnam had its hands full
finishing off what remained of the SVN
regime and the south this is after the
Paris Peace Accords were signed but
before Saigon fell China decided the
time was perfect to go in and assert
their historic claim to the Paracel
Islands the she shot Shindou
not gonna get my finger anywhere near
that red hot button suffice to say if
you can locate your personal copy of the
wool ching-chong y'all an official
history of China written sometime during
the 1040s northern song there's a
mention of those islands being part of
China going back to as early as the Tang
Dynasty during the UN Dynasty they send
someone down there and they made the
same claims Paracel Islands part of
China who knew way back then what those
reefs would become nobody was saying
much until 1887 and one of the up shots
of the sino-french war was that as part
of the agreed-upon boundary after a lot
of huffin and puffin by the qing
government the line demarcating we're
the Paracels and Spratlys lie and they
were placed on the china side of the
border but way back during the later
laid ina stay in vietnam 15th century
the vietnamese - they used to sail
around their fish in those waters they
built structures and well treated the
islands as if they owned them so this
became a ticking time bomb that could
have gone off at any time
who knew back in the Ming Dynasty that
all come down to this one day not quite
one year to the day that they inked the
Paris Peace Accords the Chinese and
Vietnamese military were firing away at
each other in the South China Sea
this was the Battle of the Paracel
Islands January 19th 1974 three days
prior the Paracels had been visited by a
group of South Vietnamese military types
and they noticed some PLA troops they're
up to something
so they radioed to Saigon for orders the
Vietnam War wasn't over yet South
Vietnam still existed at this time so
the next day thirty South Vietnamese
troops came ashore one of the island
reefs and yanked down a Chinese flag and
sent for reinforcements you always read
about these little things that escalate
quickly and soon blazed out of control
well this was an example of that both
sides quickly sent four warships each
and on the 19th after blasting away at
each other the Chinese Navy emerged the
solid Victor
53 and Vietnamese soldiers killed and
Chinese lost 18 Vietnam wasn't unified
yet so this dust-up in the South China
Sea and the ensuing settlement was
between the PRC and the South Vietnamese
government after China's stunning
victory in the Paracel Islands the North
Vietnamese government the Socialist
Republic Oh
in the spirit of communistical
Brotherhood they should have sent some
sort of congrats to their ally but they
didn't send any in the following year
after Saigon fell and the unified the
country they said whatever was agreed to
between the Chinese and the previous SVN
regime didn't concern us and to this day
Vietnam still claims the Paracels and
Spratlys as part of their country a
little point of contention that exists
between these two nations the next five
years are going to be contentious to the
extreme a lot is gonna happen between
Vietnam and China the Soviet Union and
in Cambodia let's look at that now as
soon as Vietnam was unified with the vcp
on top the Vietnam communist party they
did the same thing they did in China
there was some serious housecleaning and
violence meted out to political enemies
and one of the groups who were suspect
were the ha in Chinese we say Hua in
Vietnamese and it sounds about the same
the ha h o eh these were Viet Nam's
ethnic Chinese population and now with
the state of affairs between china and
vietnam in the mid-1970s being what it
was after the betrayal of the nixon
visit after the bad blood that flowed
following the Battle of the Paracels
these ha people these ethnic Chinese
living in Vietnam their patriotism was
questioned the vcp leadership didn't
trust them any further than they could
throw them especially along Viet Nam's
guanxi Yunnan border the hua these
ethnic Chinese it didn't matter if a
Hawaa family could trace their presence
in the Red River Delta going back twenty
seven generations they too were suspect
and began to be hounded out of the
country many were fleeing collectivist
and the nationalizing of assets namely
theirs and also like like
japanese-americans during World War two
with Vietnam government began building
these man's and ours in the country and
many ethnic Chinese were forced to
relocate to these camps and had to face
a pretty bleak future that's why so many
hua exited Vietnam to try their luck
elsewhere this was known as Viet Nam's
second exodus of refugees my wife's
family came during the first Exodus
beginning in April 1975 those were
mostly South Vietnamese with money or
ties to the Americans or French but with
this second wave that started 1978-1979
many of Viet Nam's 1.5 million hua began
leaving vietnam unmask for most of these
refugees from the second wave they had
the risk their life escaping in rickety
boats and other desperate means and
those of us old enough to remember
recall the so called boatpeople crisis
like the first wave in 75 these people
were running for their lives but for
altogether different reasons with the
second wave unlike the first these
people were mostly all ethnic Chinese
the China government saw everything that
was going on and demand that a stop to
this persecution of the wah the Vietnam
government opted to ignore the demand
and even ratcheted up the pressure by
mid 1977 already about a hundred and
sixty thousand wah had been expelled
from the country than the following year
Chinese aid to Vietnam stopped China's
leaders continued to keep a close eye on
these developments China Vietnam
relations started heading down a very
dark path let's quickly look at how
everything suddenly unraveled between
these two next-door neighbors as the
boatpeople crisis made headlines around
the world vietnam upped the ante a
little by signing a 25 year mutual
defense treaty with the Soviet Union on
November 3rd 1978
this further exacerbated the already
strained relationship between China and
Vietnam this didn't mean Russia was
going to start parking their warships at
qumran Bay but it didn't make China and
other nations in Southeast Asia a little
nervous about where this was all
possibly heading the Vietnam government
had played the Soviets well knowing how
eager they were to bounce back from the
fallout to the 1972 Nixon visit to China
not to mention their hopes of well
enjoying the benefits of Viet Nam's warm
water ports for their Navy the
sino-soviet relationship had been going
downhill already since 1954 and the two
great powers had been at loggerheads all
throughout the 60s the matter of the
Soviets was one of the primary
motivating factors for both sides that
led to rapprochement and the Nixon visit
to China in 1972 over in Cambodia
Salasar aka Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge
had taken power there in April 1975
around the same time the North
Vietnamese took Saigon Pol Pot was a
well known hater of Vietnam we all know
about the Khmer Rouge no need to rehash
all their misdeeds and atrocities here
he was China's dog in this developing
fight and was the leader of democratic
Kampuchea as soon as the Khmer Rouge had
taken power Pol Pot started harassing
the ethnic Vietnamese expelling a
hundred and fifty thousand of them and
after he emptied out the Phnom Penh he
kept up a series of attacks against
these ethnic Vietnamese not only in
democratic Kampuchea but across the
board or - into vietnam as well it was a
very bloody campaign and ethnic
Vietnamese living in Cambodia had to
hide out escape or else they suffer the
same fate as any other group being
methodically ethnically cleansed from
their homes these Khmer Vietnamese -
they took to the sea or they went into
Vietnam
so these khmer vietnamese fled east to
the relative safety of vietnam just
as a heck of a lot of Vietnamese hua
started leaving in droves 1978 in China
well that place was still trying to
shake off the horrors of the Cultural
Revolution dung shellping had just been
elevated to the top spot in the party
and he sent strong messages to the
Soviets putting them on notice that
China wouldn't sit by idly while they
tried to expand their presence down in
Southeast Asia the Soviets however they
had other plans and that warm water port
in Vietnam as far as they were concerned
don't shell ping or no dummy shell ping
that port was gonna make a fine second
home for the Soviet Pacific Fleet first
half of 1977 Vong windgap had made two
trips to the Soviet Union and concluded
agreements to expand military
cooperation this is when the Soviets
started sending personnel to Gumm Donbas
and to Da Nang the holy grail continued
to be access to those ports June 28th
1977 Vietnam joined comic-con a trade
organization of communist Nations and as
early as the summer of 1978 China knew
Vietnam was Soviet backing was going
into Cambodia
the Vietnam was a well by now a Soviet
client state and Cambodia was a Chinese
client state their interests clashed
down there sure enough in July 1978
Vietnam started bombing Cambodia then
after four years of border clashes and
decaying relations on Christmas Day 1978
Vietnam invaded Cambodia and on January
7th 1979 Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge regime
was overthrown not such a bad thing but
because Pol Pot was China's man down
there well this precipitated a major
crisis and the relations between Vietnam
and by extension the USSR and the PRC
the Soviet Union backed Viet Nam's
overthrow of the Khmer Rouge and these
events are what directly led to the 1979
war between China and Vietnam the
occupation of Cambodia would come at a
high cost and Vietnam didn't pull the
last of their troops out till 1989 dunk
shell ping was facing a major crisis
watching all this happen in his own
backyard
he tried like crazy to build bridges
around the area to counter this threat
posed by this dangerous Soviet Vietnam
Alliance besides visiting with regional
leaders dung also went to Japan and the
United States to make friends and he
left the u.s. in early february 1979 and
relations were normalized by the way
that's when I first thought hmm this
this us-china thing might be something
one day and that's when I started
studying Chinese four months later after
dung left dung considered Vietnam the
Cuba of Asia and he didn't want the
Soviets down there and circling China
any more than we wanted Soviet missiles
so close to us off the coast of Florida
if missiles were put there China at that
time still lacked the firepower the US
had during the Cuban Missile Crisis so
they had to do something to preempt this
dung put Viet Nam's leaders on notice
saying you know in so many words that
you know French and American military
didn't have the will to fight on after
heavy losses but China was here to stay
so don't mess with them dongs plan was
to go in seize a few counties to show
Vietnam it could come at any time they
wanted to and then the plan was to go in
do some damage and then head back across
the border to China then after that keep
up a period of harassment along the
border nothing big just teach Vietnam a
lesson the Soviets could learn from this
- the message was don't underestimate
China's resolve as far as this matter
was concerned this invasion of Vietnam
was China's first time back on the
battlefield since the 1962 Indian border
war besides this they were only just a
few years out of the Cultural Revolution
we all know from past episodes the PLA
went through hell in China during
ten years of chaos Viet Nam's armies on
the other hand were still
battle-hardened from their French and
American experiences still so fresh this
John John Chung or or as the Vietnamese
called at the war against Chinese
expansionism this is sometimes called
the third Indochina war China at this
time in their history had three bones to
pick with Vietnam number one
overthrowing their ally the Khmer Rouge
they didn't like that
number two the years of horrid treatment
of ethnic Chinese wah in Vietnam and the
third thing was the small but defiant
occupation of the Spratly Islands that
Vietnam maintained and these were called
the non Shah
Jindal cognizant of the relationship the
Soviets had with Vietnam before dung
went and informed them of the limited
military operation China was planning
against Vietnam he moved almost the
entire PLA up to the Soviet border and
told them don't try anything or else the
USSR didn't do anything militarily but
they did provide a lot of military
hardware and useful Intel to Viet Nam's
military command then the numerically
superior PLA invaded Vietnam with about
200,000 troops not a small army
interestingly US intelligence units were
monitoring the whole thing and even
asked dung in person if this was real or
a drill dung told them this wasn't a
drill just a little punitive mission
done Xiao ping had intended for the PLA
to go deal with the recalcitrant little
brother in this 2,000 year old
relationship he had told Jimmy Carter
during the 1979 visit that Xiao Ponyo
boot Qing hua guy got peppy-cola
which means that little friend of ours
doesn't listen to what we say we have to
go in and spank him February 17 1979
China crossed the border into Vietnam it
started off good with a rapid and
effective Chinese march into the north
of Vietnam taking long Sun on March 6th
this was the northeast province that was
right on the guanxi border they had
carried out an effective
and inflicted a lot of damage on both
the Vietnam military and civilians China
may have inflicted heavy damage on
Vietnam but it should also be pointed
out at the cost of over 7,000 killed
that's quite a large number for such a
short war in Vietnam the number was even
greater was so much national honor at
stake
neither side was terribly forthcoming
and there's no figures that could be
taken with any certainty about
casualties the cost of this war
economically had a huge impact on China
and the new economic plans that were
underway they weren't sitting on the
kind of national wealth they have now
the purpose of the invasion was to teach
Vietnam a lesson for Cambodia and to
show off to the Soviets and anyone else
who was looking the new-and-improved pla
after heavy casualties and logistical
nightmares trying to begin their
withdrawal and March 5th 1979 and
completed it on March 16th the war with
China led to even more hua being
expelled from Vietnam these refugees
ended up escaping to cities and
countries all over the world they either
got there themselves or were placed
there by any number of NGOs that dealt
with the crisis all throughout the 80s
and 90s a lot of them ended up in Santa
Ana and Westminster California not far
from me my wife worked at one of those
Vietnamese refugee camps for Save the
Children in Hong Kong when we were
living there not only the civilians even
the communist party members in Vietnam
who were wah they got expelled the late
70s was a long hard purge from the
country of these hua people Vietnam
cozied up closer than ever to the Soviet
Union letting them into Camden Bay
defiant about the isolation they were
feeling especially with China having
permanent member status in the UN
Security Council now there had been some
bad blood between Vietnam and China over
the centuries but post 1979 border war
correlations were on the rocks
dust-ups along the border continued to
happen then in 1987
China began beefing up their profile on
a few of the reefs in the Spratly
Islands early the next year Vietnam sent
out a team to go monitor what was going
on what were these Chinese up to and
this led of course to a confrontation
that didn't end well for Vietnam this
was on March 14th 1988 and was known as
the Johnson South reef skirmish this
kept the water's boiling in and around
the Spratlys the Vietnam government to
this day still hasn't given up their
claims over the Paracels and Spratlys
China's claims to the South China Sea
back when all this happened
they haven't changed much from what they
are today it's a major bone of
contention that continues on into our
very own times once the Soviet Union up
and died on December 25th 1991 and after
Vietnam had removed the remainder of
their troops from Cambodia the stage was
set for a possible improvement in China
Vietnam relations there was a secret
summit held in Chengdu in September 1990
I remember it well when it was announced
I was living in Hong Kong at the time
Vaughn went Yap himself the Deputy Prime
Minister snuck into China under the
cloak of the Asian Games going on at the
time then these two neighbors was so
much shared history that we looked at
these past six episodes they started
talking and began to warm up to each
other diplomatically at least gentlemen
returned the favor in 2002 and visited
Vietnam to go spread good share the
relations with China normalized in 1991
and all border and frontier issues were
worked out by 2008 including sea borders
in the Gulf of Tonkin at least but after
everything that had happened since 1979
not to mention for the 2,000 years
before that the relationship remained in
a potentially volatile State former
Vietnam President Truman sang visited
Beijing in 2013 with Lika Chiang
repaying the favor
during premier Lee's visit to Vietnam at
the invitation of
Prime Minister Nguyen thon you in
October 2013 a joint statement was
signed between the two leaders that
called for quote friendly neighborliness
comprehensive cooperation long term
stability and looking towards the future
end quote and in the spirit of quote
good neighbors good friends good
comrades and good partners end quote
hey sounds good to me the current
Vietnam State president is John I Quan
when Phuong is party general secretary
and the PM who succeeded in Wynton young
is winsome fook this is as of May 2018
in 1994 came us recognition of Vietnam
and the establishment of an embassy in
Hanoi as far as I know the relationship
is going in the right direction
having the Stars and Bars sailing around
those waters keeps things interesting
the South China Sea is still an issue
without a resolution as far as China
Vietnam relations go there have been a
number of flare-ups but both nations are
still working on a resolution close call
though in May 2014 with the China
National Offshore Oil Corporation
attempting to drill for oil 150 miles
off the Vietnam Coast this one got dicey
until China agreed to remove the rig
this offshore rig really brought the
Vietnamese protestors out into the
streets a lot of anti-chinese sentiment
was blown off even the Vietnam
government couldn't contain the
outpouring of emotion over what was felt
to be well a blatant provocation not to
mention an affront to Viet Nam's
national sovereignty five Chinese were
killed on the streets of Vietnam as a
result of the riots the occasional
fisherman gets caught in the nets of
this problem in the South China Sea
every now and then the Vietnam military
it's no match for the PLA so there's
only so much that can be done by force
of arms there's a simmering acrimony for
China in Vietnam that the government can
depend on whenever it feels the urge to
play the national as
card but these two great nations with
their long history have more to gain by
seeking friendship than being at each
other's throats I hope it works out well
for both sides okay folks I think we'll
wrap things up here we managed to
squeeze a lot of information into a mere
six episodes
I know Vietnam isn't one of the most
popular histories offered in high school
in college just as there are thousands
and thousands of scholars who study
China and academic institutions think
tanks and NGOs around the world same
with Vietnam maybe there's someone out
there who will perhaps think about a
Vietnam history podcast or maybe a
history of Vietnam podcast either way
I'll subscribe three books I recommend
if you want to fill in all the empty
spaces I left in the past six episodes
Amazon links to all these books are
listed on the website my main source
Yale professor Ben kiernan Vietnam a
history from earliest times to present
and Cornell professor Keith W Taylor's a
history of the Vietnamese and
Christopher gashes Vietnam a new history
professor kasha from the University of
Quebec in monkey of there's quite a bit
more than these three great history
books I was thankful to have them by my
side for the past few months okay my
friends that is going to be that for
this time onwards and upwards the next
great thing here at the China history
podcast ya proud member of the recorded
history podcast network
I'm sure you've all checked out the
great history shows available on that
network recorded history dotnet once
again let me encourage you to go to T
sense.com
te a sen z.com and search for chp and
you'll find my latest offering to all
tea lovers cuejoe may times for green
tea tray yah means emerald tips or buds
mate on no that's the place they came
from beautiful and exciting guacho
province all these ethnic minority
people there yow-yow
dong bui and many
other groups and did I say tea tea has
been grown in guacho since even before
the days of shun gnome didn't we mention
him in part 1 of this series China and
Vietnam shared ancestor anyway try it
out ladies and gentlemen's cuejoe may
Tonto emerald tips first flush green tea
only the best for the best listeners a
history podcaster could ever dream of
if that's not a case of pi moppy I don't
know what is again go to tea sense.com
search chp or go to the link on my web
page thanks everyone who's stuck with
the program for all six episodes I don't
know about all y'alls but from the
process of researching and presenting
this topic to you my knowledge
understanding and appreciation of
Vietnam history has gone from almost but
not quite nothing to well in the
home-wind household here that I belong
to next to my father-in-law
one of the nicest and most generous
people you could ever meet next to him I
may be the smartest one in the family
when it comes to the history of the old
country their ancestral homeland
I'm already hard at work on the next
topic be looking for that in the next
few weeks or so you never know with me
do you
I get them out whenever I can hey go
listen to some of the old stuff if you
haven't heard any of them in a while I
listen to one the other day and I
thought didn't I do that I'd subscribe
I'm gonna go get five stars and write a
glowing comment to my Facebook and
Twitter followers will all tell you
chief this guy doesn't post or tweet too
often but don't let that stop you from
joining our little CHP community I do
check in every now and then with all the
latest goings-on here so you might want
to consider that ok Mays on me say to
Paul mo mall let me get cutting on this
new episode or series we'll see and when
it's ready you could all come to the
launch party ok enough with the idle
chitchat this here is a la sala
montgomery coming to you for the two
hundred and second time oh you must be
tired of me by now signing off once
again from the sunny and fantastical Los
Angeles California thanks again
everybody and already I can't wait to
see you again next time
for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast
you